# Big Data Challenges: Ingesting and Processing

Requirements for Big Data Systems

1. Support big data operations: split volumes of data, access data fast, distribute computations to nodes. 
2. Handle fault tolerance: replicate data partitions, recover files when needed. 
3. Enable adding more racks / scaling out. 
4. Optimized and extensible for many data types, e.g. docs, table, key-value, graph, stream, etc. 
5. Enable both streaming and batch processing: low latency and accurate. Latency is a quantification of the delay in processing streaming data in the system. 

Volume: scalable batch processing.

Velocity: stream processing.

Variety: extensible data storage, access, and integration. 

# Querying Data

What is data retrieval? It is the way in which desired data is specified and retrieved from a data store. It refers to [1] how to specify how to get the desired data out of the system; [2] the internal processing that occurs to compute or evaluate that retrieval request. We'll also consider how this changes when we deal with fast or streaming data.

A **query language** is a language to specify the data you need. It is declarative and lets you specify what you want, without specifying how you want to compute that. An example of this is SQL. 

In contrast to query language, a **database programming language** is a high-level procedural languages that embed query operations. We'll look at some examples of these. 

# SQL

The standard for structured data. Oracle's SQL to Spark SQL. Many implementations, from classical systems to distributed databases. 

Example database schema: 
* Bars(_name_, addr, license)
* Beers(_name_, manf)
* Sells(_bar_, _beer_, price)
* Drinkers(_name_, addr, phone)
* Frequents(_drinker_, _bar_)
* Likes(_drinker_, _beer_)

Large tables can be partitioned. Many partitioning schemes. Range partitioning on the primary key. E.g. beers with names starting with "A" go to machine 1, those with names starting "B" go to machine 2, and so on. Pretty much every large database system offers this.

Question: Find records for beers whose name starts with "Am"

```sql
SELECT * FROM Beers
WHERE name LIKE 'Am%'
```

A query processing trick: Just use the partition 1, which contains information about beers starting with "A". If we know this, we can leverage it to be significantly more efficient. This requires knowledge about how the partitioning took place (based on pk). 

Local and Global INdexing: 
* What if the machine doesn't have any data for the query attributes? 
* Index Structures: given value, return records. Several solutions: use local index on each machine, use a machine index for each value, etc. 

Example of indexing: 
* We could have an index that shows which tables/machines contain certain values (like Manufacturer = "Heineken"). That way, we only search where the record actually exists and ignore locations where it does not. 

# Querying Two Relations (Tables)

Example: Find the beers liked by drinkers who frequent the Great American Bar. 

```sql
SELECT DISTINCT BEER
FROM LIKES L, FREQUENTS F
WHERE BAR = "The Great American Bar"
AND F.DRINKER = L.DRINKER
```

**SPJ Queries**: SPJ = Select, Project, Join.

There are many ways to evaluate a query, but it mostly will use the SPJ framework. It will use the select operation to meet the primary condition (BAR = "The Great American Bar"). This reduces the number of data. 

Then it joines the values on the likes relation. Drinker = Drinker. Then it will apply the deduplication operation (distinct). 

How does this work when data is partitioned across several machines. Joins in a distributed setting. 

Semijoin: 
* A semijoi from R to S on an attribute is used to reduce the data transmission cost.
* Computing Steps: [1] Project R on attribute A and call it (R[A]) - the drinkers column. [2] Ship this projection (semijoin) from the site of R to the site of S. [3] Reduce S to S' by eliminating tuples where attribute A do not match any value in R[A]. 

# Subqueries

A slightly more complicated query is below: Find the bars that serve Miller for the same or less price than what TGAB charges for Bud. 

Two subqueries: 
1. Find the price TGAB charges for Bud.
2. Find the bars that serve Miller at that price. 

