# Data Models

Data models describe data characteristics. Data _structure_ is incredibly important and there is a key distinction between structured and unstructured data. 

We are going to focus on three key attributes of data models: 
* Structures
* Operations
* Constraints

## Structures

Consider a CSV file.

`(John, Smith, 10-12-1982)`

`(Steve, Jones, 09-01-1990)`

...

This repeated pattern of data organization makes the file structured.

Unstructured data may be difficult to figure out how it's organized. Compressed data, like JPG, MP3, etc. are often unstructured. 

## Operations

* Subset: given a collection of data and some condition, return a set of data such that the condition is satisfied. E.g. pull items between a date range.

* Substructure Extraction: given a data collection with some structure, extract from each data item a part of the structure as specified by the condition. E.g. pull the first two columns only.

* Union: given two collections, create a new one with elements of the two input collections. Eliminates duplicates. The assumption behind the union operation is that the two collections have the same structure. E.g. append one table to another.

* Join: given two collections, create a new one with elements of the two input collections. Eliminates duplicates. The two collections don't need the same structure, but do need a common element(s) -- join keys. 

## Constraints

A constraint is a logical statement. They can specify something about the semantics / meaning of the data. The constraint that we have 7 and only 7 days is something the data system would not know if that knowledge is not imposed on it. 

Another constraint is that a movie must have only one title.

Different models have different types of constraints. There are many potential types of constraints.

* Value Constraint: a logical statement about data values. E.g. age must be >= 18. 

* Uniqueness Constraint: a single value only. Every movie can have only one title. 

* Cardinality Constraint: Value can be between a lower and upper limit. 

* Type Constraint: the type of the data in a field can be restricted to a type, e.g. string, number, etc. 

* Domain Constraint: the domain of a data property or attribute is the possible set of values for that attribute. E.g. for months: [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12]. 

A **structural constraint** restricts the structure of the data. Suppose we have a matrix and we restrict it to be a square matrix. This constraint implies that the $i==j$ every time. 

## Kinds of Data Models

**Relational Data Model** 

One of the simplest and most frequently used models. The basic data structure is a table. But the relational model involves a collection of tables. Each row is a **relational tuple**. The elements of the relational tuple are atomic, which means they represent one unit of information and they can't be decomposed further.

The header of a table tells us the name of the columns, their allowed type, etc. This is its **schema**. This also enforces which is the primary key and which constraints exist (e.g. not null, >25000, etc.). It may also limit the possible values.

The primary key is unique for each entry, and for every entry, knowing their primary key will allow you to join to other tables to retrieve attributes. The utilization of a primary key implies that we must not have duplicate records. 

