# Different Types of Data Models

## Vector Space Model

Text is often viewed as unstructured data because it doesn't have attributes and relationships. It is a sequence of strings with line and paragraph breaks, punctuation, etc. We need a different structure for working with text data. We'll introduce the notion of the **document / vector model**. 

Search is often not exact, but rather, based on "similarity." Search engines use some form of this to find information.

**Document Vector**: 
3 documents:

d1: "new york times" 

d2: "new york post" 

d3: "los angeles times" 

We convert this into a matrix where the rows are the "word indicator", d1, d2, etc. The columns are the individual words that could be in the item. 

|    | angeles | los | new | post | times | york |
|----|---------|-----|-----|------|-------|------|
| d1 |0|0|1|0|1|1|
| d2 |0|0|1|1|0|1|
| d3 |1|1|0|0|1|0|

We put the number of occurrences of a term in a document in the appropriate cell of the matrix. This is called a **term-frequency matrix** (TF). 

We'll now create a new vector called the **inverse document frequency** for each term. 

$TFIDF_i = log_2(\frac{numDocs}{numOccurrences_i})$

The document frequency of a term is the count of that term in the whole collection, divided by the number of documents. Here, we take the inverse of that. This penalizes words that are too commonplace in the collection. IDF is like a penalty factor for widely used terms.

We can then compute a TF-IDF matrix. Each document has a vector of TF-IDF values, which represents the relative importance of each term in the vocabulary. 

To perform a search in the vector space, we create a query based on a similarity function between two vectors to explain how far they are apart. Whichever document is closest to the query vector, that's our match. 

There are many similarity functions. A popular similarity function is the **cosine distance**, which measures the angle between two vectors using the cosine. IF the vectors are identical, the angle between them is zero. As the angle increases, they become more dissimilar. 

$sim = cos(\theta) = \frac{A\cdot B}{||A||||B||}$

Every term may be optionally associated with a weight term. You can use this same approach for image search as well. 

## Graph Data Model

Social networks are the most obvious example of graph data. What distinguishes a graph from other data models is that it involves properties and attributes of entities / relationships, and the connectivity structure the constitutes the network itself. 

**Paths**: graph data can be used to compute _paths_ to/from nodes. This involves the concept of traversal. 

"Optimal Path Operations"
* Find the shortest path between nodes. 
* Find an optimal round-trip path that must include some user-specified nodes. 
* Find the best compromise paths between two nodes (pareto-optimality). Given two or more optimization criteria that cannot be satisfied simultaneously. 

The neighborhood of a node N, is the set of edges directly connected to it. A k neighborhood of N, is the collection of edges between nodes that are at most k steps from N. 

**Communities**
* A subgraph of a graph that has many more edges within the subgraph compared to edges to nodes outside the subgraph. 
* Operations: dense subgraph finding; optimization of clusters. 
* Communities is another name for clusters.

**Anomalous Neighborhoods**: 
* Sometimes we can find anomalies in our graphs / communities. This might refer to the way neighbors of a point are connected amongst themselves, hyperconnectivity, etc. 

**Connectedness** is a fundamental property of graphs: every node is reachablef rom every node in the undirected version of the graph. A search query like "finding optimal paths" can only be performed in connected graphs. 

## Other Data Models

* Arrays can serve as a data model.
* Images can be modeled as vector arrays.

**Array as a Data Model**

An array is a matrix / indexed relation. It has a table representation. The number of columns = # of dimensions + 1. 