# A Game: Catch the Pink Flamingo

Imagine you're part of a company caled **Eglence Inc**. One of their products is a mobile game called **Catch the Pink Flamingo**. The objective is to catch as many Pink Flamingos as possible by following the missions provided by real-time prompts in the game and cover the map provided for each level. The levels get more complicated in mission speed and map complexity as you move up. 

It's a multi-user game where players must catch Pink Flamingos that randomly pop up on a gridded world map based on missions that change in real-time. For the player or team to move to the next level, they need to have at least one point in every map grid cell. The mission might be to "tag flamingos on land with stars on their belly." If a player tags any other flamingo, they get -1 points on that map location. 

After initial signup, the player plays level 1 individually without joining a team. This trains the user and builds a game history. Level 1 is easy and composed of an 8x8 grid. After that, the player is asked if they want to join any team or form a team, even a 1-person team. 

At the beginning of each level, the game creates a brand new map with more cells than the level before. Complexity also increases. Missions change more frequently as levels increase. 

Players keep touch via chat boards assigned to the teams and also via social media, e.g. Twitter. Some rules to consider before designing an information system for this game.

* **Ranking of Users**: each user will be ranked individually by the speed and accuracy of their click to completion. Rankings are tracked in real-time and can be viwed both via the mobile app and the website for the game. In addition to score, speed, and accuracy ranking, the other players can see what parts of the map the user has the most points for. Players are categorized via their history as a "rising star", "veteran", "coach", "social butterfly", and "hot flamingo." 

* **Ranking of Teams**: teams are publicly ranked, there is a max of 30 members in a team and a minimum of 1. Players "ask" to join a team and get voted in when 80% of members allow. A team can choose to "recruit" if they think a player can contribute or "outvote" a player if they're not contributing. There is a "points-based economy" and players can leave teams and bring their points along. When all players leave a team, the team is removed from public and archived.

* **In-Game Purchases**: users are allowed in-game purchases including binoculars to spot mission-specific flamingos, special flamingos that count for more than one point, ice blocks to freeze a mission for 20 seconds when needed, and trading cards to transfer extra points from some grid cells to the ones without any points.

* **Game Completion**: The game never ends, meaning that there will always be a more complicated next level. A challenge for the company is to keep the game interesting and engaging for players who have been around a long time. They make use of big data analytics to ensure veteran players stick around.

